Artificial intelligence (AI) is being increasingly integrated into scientific discovery to augment and accelerate research, helping scientists to generate hypotheses, design experiments, collect and interpret large datasets, and gain insights that might not have been possible using traditional scientific methods alone. Here we examine breakthroughs over the past decade that include self-supervised learning, which allows models to be trained on vast amounts of unlabelled data, and geometric deep learning, which leverages knowledge about the structure of scientific data to enhance model accuracy and efficiency. Generative AI methods can create designs, such as small-molecule drugs and proteins, by analysing diverse data modalities, including images and sequences. We discuss how these methods can help scientists throughout the scientific process and the central issues that remain despite such advances. Both developers and users of AI tools need a better understanding of when such approaches need improvement, and challenges posed by poor data quality and stewardship remain. These issues cut across scientific disciplines and require developing foundational algorithmic approaches that can contribute to scientific understanding or acquire it autonomously, making them critical areas of focus for AI innovation.

The foundation for forming scientific insights and theories is laid by how data are collected, transformed and understood. The rise of deep learning in the early 2010s has significantly expanded the scope and ambition of these scientific discovery processes1. Artificial intelligence (AI) is increasingly used across scientific disciplines to integrate massive datasets, refine measurements, guide experimentation, explore the space of theories compatible with the data, and provide actionable and reliable models integrated with scientific workflows for autonomous discovery. Data collection and analysis are fundamental to scientific understanding and discovery, two of the central aims in science2, and quantitative methods and emerging technologies, from physical instruments such as microscopes to research techniques such as bootstrapping, have long been used to reach these aims3. The introduction of digitization in the 1950s paved the way for the general use of computing in scientific research. The rise of data science since the 2010s has enabled AI to provide valuable guidance by identifying scientifically relevant patterns from large datasets. 

Although scientific practices and procedures vary across stages of scientific research, the development of AI algorithms cuts across traditionally isolated disciplines (Fig. 1). Such algorithms can enhance the design and execution of scientific studies. They are becoming approach is incorporating scientific knowledge into AI models by including information about fundamental equations, such as the laws of physics or principles of molecular structure and binding in protein folding. Such inductive biases can enhance AI models by reducing the number of training examples needed to achieve the same level of accuracy10 and scaling analyses to a vast space of unexplored scientific hypotheses11.